# What is Angular?
- Angular is a Typescript-based open-source frontend framework. Angular can be used to build either web or mobile app.
- Angular presents all the front-end solutions on it. (e.g. router, HTTP Client..)

</br>

# Versions of Angular
- **_Angular 4_** featured an improved compiler that reduced the size of JavaScript code generated from Angular’s HTML and TypeScript by more than half. It also placed animations in a separate package to remove extra code from the production bundle. Those efforts made the framework smaller and faster.
- **_Angular 5_** simplified building **progressive web apps** and also added CLI Workspaces to handle multiple Angular projects.
- **_Angular 7_** CLI was enhanced with prompts to explain the functions and purposes of elements, so using CLI became more intuitive.
- **_Angular 8_** arrived with a preview of **Ivy**, a new generation renderer meant to replace the older compiler and runtime  — View Engine. The goal of Ivy was to make the app run faster and reduce the bundle size.
- A full switch to Ivy happened in **_Angular 9_** where it became a default compiler for all applications.
- While **_Angular 10_** focused on quality and performance improvements rather than on new features, Angular 11 presented Component Test Harnesses to help with testing Angular Material components. Another widely advertised innovation of the ninth version is automatic font inlining  — at the compile stage, Angular CLI downloads and inlines fonts being used in the project.
- **_Angular 12_** concentrated on stylistic improvements, giving developers more control over the project, and removing legacy components. This tendency extended to the next version. 
- **_Angular 13_**,  the support for View Engine (the first Angular renderer), Internet Explorer 11, and Node.js versions prior to 12.20.0 came to an end. It also simplified creating dynamic components.
- **_Angular 14_** pleased developers with a long-awaited feature  — **Strictly Typed Forms**. Many engineers call it the most significant upgrade since the introduction of the Ivy renderer. Previously, Reactive or Model-Driven Forms in Angular didn’t have type definitions, and as a result, TypeScript couldn’t catch many common errors. Now, this issue is fixed.

</br>

# What is TypeScript?
- TypeScript is an Object-oriented programming language based on JavaScript, and added optional types, classes, interfaces and more.
- Browser compiles TS to JS.
- The type system of TypeScript is optional. The language does not force developer to use static typing.

  > **Benefits of TS**: Static typing of TypeScript will help the compiler and show any potential error warnings before an app is even run. Static typing also let the developer know what type of data the APIs expect.
  
</br>

# Key components of Angular
- Component: basic building blocks of angular applications to control HTML views
- Modules: a set of angular basic building blocks. Logical boundaries in the application (may includes components, directives, services, etc.)
- Templates: represents the views of Angular application
- Services: single, shared instance for any component registered in the service (e.g. _providedIn: "root"_)
 
</br>

# Directives
- Components: directives with a template
- Structural directives: change the DOM layout by adding and removing DOM elements (e.g. _*ngIf, *ngFor_)
- Attribute directives: change the appearance or behavior of an element, component, or another directive (e.g. _ngClass, ngStyle, ngModel_)
 
</br>

# Data binding in Angular
- Component to DOM
  - Interpolation
    > ``` {{ value }} ```
  - Property binding
    > ``` [property]="value" ```
- DOM to Component
  - Event binding
    > ``` (event)="function" ```
  - Two-way binding
    > ``` [(ngModel)]="value" ```
 
</br>

# Angular lifecycle hooks

1. **ngOnChanges**: When the value of the data-bound property changes, this method is called.
2. **ngOnInit**: whenever the initialization of the directive/component after Angular first displays the data-bound properties happens.
3. **ngDoCheck**: called for the detection and to act on changes that Angular can't or won't detect on its own.
4. **ngAfterContentInit**: called in response after Angular projects external content into the component's view.
5. **ngAfterContentChecked**: called in response after Angular checks the content projected into the component.
6. **ngAfterViewInit**: called in response after Angular initializes the component's views and child views.
7. **ngAfterViewChecked**: called in response after Angular checks the component's views and child views.
8. **ngOnDestroy**: the cleanup phase just before Angular destroys the directive/component.

> **_constructor vs. ngOnInit_**
> - **constructor** is called first, usually import services in it. _Dependency Injection._ Constructor cannot get the data from @Input
> - **ngOnInit** is Angular's own method. used to initial define Angular bindings. It is the best place to prepare initial data for its component. It happens after OnChanges, so it can get the data from @Input.

>  **_bootstrap_** in _app.module_
> - The module tells the app which component to bootstrap, as in start the application
 
</br>

# Communication with components and data
- **@Input**, get data from Parent;
- **@Output**, emit data to Parent;
- **@ViewChild**, get element from only one sub dom;
- **@ViewChildren**, get elements from sub-dom, as a node list;
- **Service**, share data through components;
- **NgRx**, a library for state management, share data via a singleton data store in-app.

</br>

# Service
- A service is used when various modules need to use a common functionality. Services allow for greater separation of concerns for the application and better modularity.
- CLI
  ```
  ng g s path/serviceName
  ```

## HTTP Client
- A methods to communicate with backend services from a frontend application over HTTP protocol. (using either _XMLHttpRequest_ interface or _fetch()_ API)
- provide HttpInterceptor to set headers of requests

</br>

# Pipe
- A pipe takes data as input and transforms it into the desired output. We use pipes in the template to manipulate data step by step or get the data from observables.
- CLI
  ```
  ng g p pipeName
  ```
## Async pipe
- The Async pipe subscribes an observable or promise, and gets the latest value that the observable has emitted.
- When a new value is emitted, the pipe marks the component to be checked for changes.
## Parameterized pipe
  - declaring the pipe name with a colon and showing the format of output value.
  ```
  {{ birthday | date: 'dd/MM/yyyy' }}
  ```
## Pipe chains
  ```
  {{ data | date | uppercase }}
  ```

> **_Pure vs. Impure pipe_**
>  - A pure pipe is only called when Angular detects a change in the value or the parameters passed to a pipe. 
>  - An impure pipe is called for every change detection cycle no matter whether the value or parameters change. every keystroke or mouse move will call the impure pipe.

</br>

# Observable
- Observables are used to provide support for passing messages between publishers and subscribers in your application. Use for event handling, async programming, and handling multiple values.

> **_How to handle HttpClient Error?_**
> - HttpClient will return an error in the object. Catch the error in the _second_ callback function of the subscribe function.

> **_Observable vs. Promise_**
> | | Promise | Observable |
> | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
> | Value | creates *one* value | provides *multiple values* over time |
> | Stream | *immediately* called, cannot stop | needs to *subscribe*, unsubscribe to stop |
> | Error Handle | push errors to its *child promises* | handle the error in *subscribe method* |
> | Data Handle | .then( ) .catch( ) .finally( ) to manipulate data step bt step | RxJs operators, using *pipe( )* to manipulate data |


## How to create Observable
- **of** : emit a sequence of values
- **from** : emit an object, array or function
- **fromEvent**: emit Observable events
- **ajax** : emit an ajax Observable
- **HttpClient.get( )** : returns an Observable


## Subject
- Subject is a special type of Observable
- **behaviorSubject**: holds the latest value from the time when it is subscribed, it emits the value immediately. *Subject* does not hold value.
  
</br>

# Router
- A mechanism that navigates pages from one to another

## Router steps
1. The route config starts
2. the route guards start to check the user right
3. if the user passes the guards check, the route resolve starts, and it will hold some info from the current page to the next page.
4. then the page switch to the next page.

## How to detect a route change
- subscribe to router observable to detect changes in angular,  (from angular 7) like:
```javascript
router.events.subscribe (event: Event) { if something then you create this event }
```

## Route Guards
- It is used for authentication. Route guards basically tell the router whether the router should allow navigation in the first place. 

## Lazy loading
- By default, Angular NgModules will load everything as soon as the app loads, even some resources not immediately necessary. Lazy loading loads resources only when they called.
- Lazy loading helps keep the initial bundle size smaller, which in helps decrease loading times.
```javascript
loadChildren: () => import('./path/lazy-loading.module').then(data => data.lazyLoadingModule)
```

## How to use a resolver in router
- Import “Resolve” interface from ‘@angular/router’.
Implement the Resolve class.
- Override resolve() method. It returns a value or observable if you want to use it later in your loaded component class.
- Define the resolver in Route and import it in AppModule.
- Finally, get the data in the component which should be navigated, by injecting ActivatedRoute to the component and subscribe it.

</br>

# Forms
> ### Forms vs. reactiveForms
> - Forms (template-driven forms)
>   - HTML-based, able to add validators to input field
>   - Simple. Good for small/medium size forms. Don’t need to make multiple files.
> - reactiveForms
>   - One of the basic functions of Angular
>   - Handling form inputs that value changes over time. (Observable-based API)
>   - Make a form group to use multiple controls or custom validators with regex patterns.

### HTML
```html
<form [formGroup]= "userForm" (ngSubmit)="onSubmit()">
  <p>
    <label> Name: </label>
    <input type="text" formControlName="userName">
  </p>
  <p>
    <label> Email: </label>
    <input type="text" formControlName="email">
  </p>
  <p>
    <button type="submit" [disabled]="!form.valid">Submit</button>
  </p>
</form>
```
### TS
```typescript
  export class MyComponent {
    userForm: FormGroup;
    
    constructor(private fb: FormBuilder) {}

    ngOnInit(): void {
      this.userForm = this.fb.group({
        userName: ['', Validators.required],
        lastName: ['', Validators.required]
      })
    }
    onSubmit() {
      console.log(this.userForm.value);
    }
  }
```
</br>

# Testing
### Karma-Jasmine
- **Jasmine** test framework and **Karma** test runner for the angular tests
  - Describe( ) to declare a suite of tests
  - it( ) to declare a single test
  - expect( ) to expect test output
- **Spy** is an easy way to check if a function was called or to provide a custom return value. Use spies to test components, by mocking a service, it can avoid actually calling the service's methods to get a value.
### TestBed
- TestBed is an API for writing unit tests in angular. 
It provides an easy way to create components, handle injection, test asynchronous behavior, and interact with the application.