# Angular Interview Questions

## Observable vs. Promise
> | | Promise | Observable |
> | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
> | Value | creates *one* value | provides *multiple values* over time |
> | Stream | *immediately* called, cannot stop | needs to *subscribe*, unsubscribe to stop |
> | Error Handle | push errors to its *child promises* | handle the error in *subscribe method* |
> | Data Handle | .then( ) .catch( ) .finally( ) to manipulate data step bt step | RxJs operators, using *pipe( )* to manipulate data |

</br>

## Observable vs. Subject
- Observable is for the consumer, it can be transformed and subscribed.
- Subject implements both the Observable and the Observer interface.
- Observables are unicast and Subjects are multicast.

Observable
```javascript
import {Observable} from 'rxjs';

let obs = Observable.create(observer=>{
   observer.next(Math.random());
})

obs.subscribe(res=>{
  console.log('subscription a :', res); //subscription a :0.2859800202682865
});

obs.subscribe(res=>{
  console.log('subscription b :', res); //subscription b :0.694302021731573
});
```
Subject
```javascript
import {Subject} from 'rxjs';

let obs = new Subject();

obs.subscribe(res=>{
  console.log('subscription a :', res); // subscription a : 0.91767565496093
});

obs.subscribe(res=>{
  console.log('subscription b :', res);// subscription b : 0.91767565496093
});

obs.next(Math.random());
```

</br>

## Lifecycle in Angular component
1. **ngOnChanges** : (if the component has bound inputs), and on data-bound input changes
2. **ngOnInit** : after component is created
3. **ngDoCheck** : Called immediately after ngOnChanges() on every change detection run, and immediately after ngOnInit() on the first run.
4. ngAfterContentInit
5. ngAfterContentChecked
6. ngAfterViewInit
7. ngAfterViewChecked
8. **ngOnDestroy** : Cleanup just before Angular destroys the directive or component. Unsubscribe Observables and detach event handlers to avoid **_memory leaks_**.

</br>

## Constructor vs. ngOnInit
- Constructor’s a default method of a class executed when such class is instantiated. NgOnInit is a lifecycle hook that happens after a component is finished being created.
- The Constructor is used to handle dependency injection and not much else, while NgOnInit is where actual work should be done when all components’ bindings are resolved.

</br>

## changeDetection OnPush
- With default change detection we check all expressions of all templates on the hierarchy tree, while with onpush angular will only update our component upon an input reference changing, event from the component or its children, an async pipe linked to the template emits a different value, or a manual trigger.
  
</br>

## How to improve the performance in Angular
- LazyLoading : load resources only when they are needed
- PreLoading : A optimization strategy that loads resources for future navigation or consumption. This speeds up both loading and rendering of the resource because the resource will already be present in the browser
- Pure Pipes : pure pipe gives the latest result without more calculations when a condition changes
- TrackBy : option for *ngFor directive. When the component map a big array, only render the UI when the tracked part changes
- Web Workers : creates another thread.
- onPush / changeDetection strategy

</br>

## View encapsulation
- We can encapsulate a component’s styles with the component’s host element so they only affect the part of the application we want it to.
- We can set different types of encapsulation in the component decorator
  - Emulated: default.
  - None: sets styles to a global level.
  - Shadow dom: the entire DOM is wrapped inside a shadow DOM, and is not affected by global styles.

</br>

## Why need to unsubscribe observable?
- To avoid memory leaks and abort HTTP requests.

</br>

## Pipe
- A pipe takes data as input and transforms it into the desired output. A pipe is used in the template to manipulate data or get the data from observables (async pipe)
- You can chain pipes using ' | ' sign

</br>

## How to fetch data in Angular, what is interceptor
- Fetch data from the backend with HTTP requests using httpClient
- We can use HttpInterceptor to put the auth token in these request headers

</br>

## What is router and guard?
- Angular Router is a full routing solution for a SPA.
- Router guards are used for authorization, telling the router the conditions on which to allow a user to navigate to a certain route

</br>

## What is Rxjs, operators in rxjs you used?
- Rxjs is Reactive Extensions JavaScript. Use observables to build reactive programming. 
- map, merge, of, filter, reduce, etc.

</br>

## What is NgRx?
- Angular Reactive Extensions. NgRx provides global/local  state management, isolation of side effects, router bindings, code generations.

</br>

## TypeScript vs. JavaScript
- TypeScript is based on JavaScript, add optional types, classes, interfaces and more.
- Browser compiles TS to JS.
- The type system of TypeScript is optional. The language does not force developer to use static typing.